Now, we introduce just an descriptive statistics case where we talked about the variants andwe said that when we have to report measure in the original units, then afterwards anothermeasure is very useful and we introduce the notion of a standard deviation in that case.Similarly, we are going to introduce the measure of a standard deviation of a random variable.So, I can define the standard deviation of a random variable as a square root of thevariance of the random variable and this quantity is called the standard deviation of X. Inother words, it is just the positive square root of the variance and like the expectedvalue, now if I have a random variable, the expected value of the random variable wouldtake a units and since this is the variance of square root of the variance of X, the standarddeviation of the random variable and the expected value have the same units or they are measuredin same units.Now, let us again look at properties of the standard deviation. So again, what we areinterested in knowing is I already have the following, if X is a random variable and cis a constant, expectation of c times X is c into expectation of X, the variance is csquare variance of X. Now, expectation of X plus c is expectation of X plus c this isjust variance of X. This is something which we have already seen.So, now let us see what happens to the standard deviation of a, so I know this standard deviationof X is given by SD of X. So, now I know that SD of X is square root of variance of X. So,what would SD of cX be? SD of cX is going to be variance, square root of variance ofX, cX I know variance of cX is c square variance of X. So, this is going to be c into rootvariance of X. I know root variance of X is standard deviation of X. So, standard deviationof cX is c times standard deviation of X. That is my first property.That is standard deviation of a constant multiple of a random variable is constant multipleinto c D of X. So, I can write here this is c into standard deviation of X.The next thing which we will need to see is what happens to standard deviation of X plusc this is going to be root of variance of X plus c which was same as root of varianceof X because variance of X plus c is same as root of variance of X which is standarddeviation of X. So, I have standard deviation of X plus c is standard deviation of X andI can complete the table by writing standard deviation of X here.Now, this is very useful, these properties are very useful for me to compute certainformula. So, now let us look at an example where I am interested in knowing the following.So, if variance of X is 4, what is standard deviation of 3X? Now, if variance of X isequal to 4, I know standard deviation of X is equal to 2 which is the same as root ofvariance of X, now if standard deviation of X is 2, then I apply standard deviation ofc times X, c is equal to 3 here, is 3 times standard deviation of X which gives me 3 into2 which is equal to 6 and hence the answer is 6.Now, there is another way we can do it. If variance of X equal to 4, I know varianceof 3 times X is 9 into variance of X which is equal to 36, hence standard deviation of3 times X is going to be square root of 36 which is equal to 6. Both of them give youthe same answer. Now, let us look at the second question. Variance of 2X plus 3. I know varianceof 2X plus 3 applying my formula is 4 times variance of X. Now, this is given to be 16which gives me the variance of X is equal to 4. Hence, standard deviation of X is equalto 2. So, standard deviation of X is equal to 2 if variance of 2X plus 3 equal to 16.Now, let us look at a few applications of standard deviation. Remember, standard deviationtakes the same units as that of the expected value. Recall we talked about Sanjay and Anithawho were two people. Now assume that they are a married couple that is, I define a family,they are a married couple, this is how I am defining it. They work for the same company.Now, I am giving Anitha s bonus as a random var

iable. I know the expected value and standarddeviation of Anitha's bonus.So, let X be Anitha's bonus, it is a random variable and bonus, X is a random variable,I given that expectation of X is rupees 15000, it takes the values and standard deviationof X also takes the same value, it is rupee 3000. Now, let Y be Sanjay s bonus. What isgiven to us is expectation of Y is 20000 and standard deviation, again it takes the sameunits if 4000 rupees. Again I am assuming earnings of Sanjay and Anitha are independentof each other, this implies that X and Y are independent random variables.That the earnings of Sanjay and Anitha are independent of each other, so if I have thebonus they are independent of each other, hence X and Y are independent random variables.This is an assumption. I want to know what is the expected value and standard deviationof the total family bonus where family I am just assuming Sanjay and Anitha form a family.So, my total family bonus is going to be X plus Y is my total family bonus, I want toknow what is expectation of X plus Y and I want to know what is standard deviation ofX plus Y. X and Y are any random variable, we know expectation of X plus Y is expectationof X plus expectation of Y that is the sum expectation of sum is sum of expectation.Hence, expectation expected value of the total family bonus is going to be 15000 plus 20000which is going to give me a rupees 35000.Now to compute the standard deviation of X plus Y I know the variance of X is going tobe 9, variance of Y is, variance of X plus Y is 25 which will give me the standard deviationof X plus Y is square root of variance of X plus variance of Y which is about 5000 rupees.Hence, I have computed the expected value and standard deviation of the total familyincome.Now let us look at another application which is Lawyer s fees. Suppose I have a lawyerwho has to decide about two options. The first option of the lawyer is charge a fixed feeswhether I win or lose, if I am the lawyer, I am going to just charge a fixed fee andwhat is my fixed fee? It is 25000 rupees. And the second option, this is option 1, thesecond option is I am going to gamble.So, here I say that I can either win or lose, I assume I can win and lose with equal probability.I say that you pay me but you pay me 50000 if I win, you do not have to pay me anythingif I lose. So, the question is, is option 1 or option 2 favourable to me if I say Iam lawyer. So, let us look at the expected value in both the cases. Now, here if X ismy earning when I am charging a fixed fee, X is taking 1 value which is 25000 with probability1, hence expectation of X is rupees 25000.Now, Y takes the value 50000 with probability half, 0 with probability half, expectationof Y is again rupees 25000. So, if only expected value was of concern to me, then both theoptions return the same expected value namely, 25000 rupees. But there is a risk. Whereasoption 1 always gives me 25000 surely whether I win or lose, here option 2 gives me a highreturn if I win and I could lose money, so I lose money that is I do not get anythingat all if I lose. So, there is a risk of me not getting anything at all. The expectedvalue does not reflect this risk.So, how can I compute that? Now let us look at the standard deviation of the X values,standard deviation of X and standard deviation of Y. X takes only 1 values, hence the standarddeviation here is equal to 0, whereas when I look at standard deviation of Y, Y takesthe value 50000 and 0 with equal probabilities.I can check that the standard deviation of Y is equal to 25000. So, you can see thatwhereas here if in a sense I am measuring the risk of me losing money with standarddeviation, then I can see that this option 2 has a much higher risk than option 1. Thoughin expectation both of them return the same value.Hence, the notion of standard deviation plays an important role in applications of thiskind where you want to measure in addition to expected value or the average, you wantto have

 a measure of dispersion, dispersion can measure volatility or spread or risk insome way, I am loosely defining this terms but I just want you to give an idea of whereyou could use measures of standard deviation and he that can help you or aid you in decisionmaking.So, if you are a person from whom this risk is important, then you might just go withoption a, but for if you are a person who feels that it is okay to take this level ofrisk, then option b is a better option for you because you have a chance of getting 25000extra which is you get 50000 rupees.So, in summary what we have learned so far is the notion of a standard deviation of arandom variable. We looked at again properties of the standard deviation namely we saw thatstandard deviation of c times X is c into standard deviation of X and standard deviationof X plus c is standard deviation of X itself and we looked at how to apply concepts ofstandard deviation to answer certain real time applications.With this our discussion on general discrete random variable is complete. The next thingwhich you are going to look at is a very special and specific random variable which is calledthe binomial distribution. So, again we will start by looking at where our instances werea binomial distribution make sense, we look at the expectation and the variance of a binomialrandom variable and we look at a lot of applications wherein the random variable can be modelledas a binomial random variable and how we can use that information to reach to conclusions.Thank you.

